[Music]
Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger, and this is a new
series that's going to explore the foundations of
modern mathematics in a new and better way. I'm
a research mathematician at the University of New
South Wales in Sydney, Australia. I'm also the
discoverer of rational trigonometry. The aims of
this series are primarily three: I want to expose
some of the weaknesses that currently exist in set
theory, in analysis, and in various other related
areas of mathematics, including geometry. I want
to also lay a new foundation for mathematics, a
framework which makes sense, which doesn't rely on
authority, doesn't rely on various unsubstantiated
axiomatic systems, one that anyone can understand
who wants to follow from the beginning. The third
aim is I want to provide a resource for teachers,
for public school teachers, and for high school
teachers. I want to explain the subject in a
way that people developing curriculum can have a
basis for making rational decisions about what to
include and what not to include. Now, this will
not be a course in mathematics. I'm interested
in laying the foundations but not on building
elaborate theories. So I'm going to go around,
and we're going to look at various topics and ask
ourselves what are really the essential notions
here. What are the main definitions? How do they
fit into place correctly? When mathematics is done
right, all the blocks do fit together really well.
It's not artificial; things really do work out,
and this is going to be the test for us, that
we're really doing things in the right way. So
our main principles that we'll follow are that
we're going to start right from the beginning.
We're not going to assume that you already have
a PhD in set theory and logic. We're not going to
assume a lot of sophistication, a lot of jargon.
We're going to start from the beginning. The first
steps are usually the most important ones in any
journey, and it's especially true when developing
mathematics. You have to start from the beginning,
and you have to start in a simple way. So we are
going to keep things simple and natural. We're
going to try to connect with the real world at
all times, and finally, we're going to keep an
open mind. We're not going to just accept the
usual orthodoxy because people tell us, and we're
also going to be prepared that we don't have the
final say, that we may be prepared to revisit what
we have already done in later videos and come back
and think about things in slightly different ways
if necessary. So how are we going to start? We're
going to start with the most important subject
in mathematics. The most important objects in
mathematics, the most important mathematical
objects, are the natural numbers: 1, 2, 3,
4, and so on. These have obviously been
around for hundreds of thousands of years,
and as we develop them from first principles,
let's not get too sophisticated. The starting
point is an empty page, nothing. This is
how we start mathematics. We start with
nothing. Now we want to introduce
something. There is our symbol for
something. It represents a single
entity. I'm going to call it
one. So we have had nothing before. Now we have
a single entity which we're calling one. It's a
stroke on the paper. We could also represent it
with a dot or a circle or something else, but
let's agree it's a little vertical stroke. Then
the next idea is the idea of adding one to itself.
One and another one, that makes
a number which we'll call two,
and then we can iterate. We can keep on adding
one to what we've already got to get a sequence
of objects which we'll call at this point 1,
1, 1, 1, 1, and so on, whose names will be
3,
4, 5, and so on. So we do not assume yet
the Arabic Hindu notational system that
we're all used to because that's a much
more sophisticated idea. So currently,
what a natural number is is just a string
of ones. So let's write that down as a main
definition. Natural
number is a
string of
ones. Mathematical objects are all going
to be based on natural numbers. These are
our first mathematical objects, and
it turns out that everything else
that we do will ultimately be based on
natural numbers. So a few observations:
the natural numbers form a sequence. They are
naturally ordered. To every natural number,
we can associate the next one, which we might
call the successor. So we can say that the
successor of one is one or two. The successor of
two is three, and so on. So this is a notion of
successor. It's our first example of a
mathematical operation. We take a number;
its successor is another number. So
my daughter loves Littlest Pet Shops,
and there are dozens of these little things lying
around our house. And so here are a bunch of
Littlest Pet Shops. Suppose we want to count how
many there are. Well, what we do is first one we
make a stroke, for the next
one we make a stroke, next
one stroke, next one a stroke,
and the next one another stroke,
and then we say that the number of
Littlest Pet Shops was 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
which we also call five. So we have the natural
numbers, we have the natural successor function.
The other important concept that's really
elementary is the notion of relative size:
which one is bigger, which one is smaller. So if
we have two numbers, say that one and that one,
then to compare those two numbers, in other words,
to find out which one comes first in the sequence,
what we do is we think about pairing the ones
in each sequence. You see we've paired up
the elements, the ones in the first string,
with some of the ones in the second string,
and we have some left over. This tells us that the
second one is larger than the first number. So we
have a notion of bigger than. Now let's introduce
a little bit of abstract notation. Okay, let's
represent a natural number, which
we'll just call a number, by a letter,
so it's a general thing. For example, n or m.
So now we can say that n equals m. By that we
mean that the ones in n can be paired up with the
ones in m. That's the notion of equality when two
numbers are the same. And we also have a notion
of inequality. We say that n is less than m,
which means that n comes before m in the sequence
of natural numbers. Now that we have what the
natural numbers are, the next step is to think
about arithmetical operations on natural numbers:
addition, multiplication, subtraction, and
division. That's what we're going to do with
our next video. I hope you'll join me. I'm
Norman Wer, thanks for [Music] listening.
Let me know if you need any further assistance!